README_rungen.md, before:

# Running and Benchmarking Halide Generators

## Overview

`RunGen` is a simple(ish) wrapper that allows an arbitrary Generator to be built
into a single executable that can be run directly from bash, without needing to
wrap it in your own custom main() driver. It also implements a rudimentary
benchmarking and memory-usage functionality.

If you use the standard CMake (or Bazel) rules for Generators, you get RunGen
functionality automatically. (If you use Make, you might need to add an extra
rule or two to your Makefile; all the examples in `apps/` already have these
rules.)

For every `halide_library` (or `halide_library_from_generator`) rule, there is
an implicit `name.rungen` rule that generates an executable that wraps the
Generator library:

```
# In addition to defining a static library named "local_laplacian", this rule
# also implicitly defines an executable target named "local_laplacian.rungen"
halide_library(
    local_laplacian
    SRCS local_laplacian_generator.cc
)
```

You can build and run this like any other executable:

```
$ make bin/local_laplacian.rungen && ./bin/local_laplacian.rungen
Usage: local_laplacian.rungen argument=value [argument=value... ] [flags]
...typical "usage" text...
```

To be useful, you need to pass in values for the Generator's inputs (and
locations for the output(s)) on the command line, of course. You can use the
`--describe` flag to see the names and expected types:

```
# ('make bin/local_laplacian.rungen && ' prefix omitted henceforth for clarity)
$ ./bin/local_laplacian.rungen --describe
Filter name: "local_laplacian"
  Input "input" is of type Buffer<uint16> with 3 dimensions
  Input "levels" is of type int32
  Input "alpha" is of type float32
  Input "beta" is of type float32
  Output "local_laplacian" is of type Buffer<uint16> with 3 dimensions
```

Warning: Outputs may have `$X` (where `X` is a small integer) appended to their
names in some cases (or, in the case of Generators that don't explicitly declare
outputs via `Output<>`, an autogenerated name of the form `fX`). If this
happens, don't forget to escape the `$` with a backslash as necessary. These are
both bugs we intend to fix; see https://github.com/halide/Halide/issues/2194

As a convenience, there is also an implicit target that builds-and-runs, named
simply "NAME.run":

```
# This is equivalent to "make bin/local_laplacian.rungen && ./bin/local_laplacian.rungen"
$ make bin/local_laplacian.run
Usage: local_laplacian.rungen argument=value [argument=value... ] [flags]

# To pass arguments to local_laplacian.rungen, set the RUNARGS var:
$ make bin/local_laplacian.run RUNARGS=--describe
Filter name: "local_laplacian"
  Input "input" is of type Buffer<uint16> with 3 dimensions
  Input "levels" is of type int32
  Input "alpha" is of type float32
  Input "beta" is of type float32
  Output "local_laplacian" is of type Buffer<uint16> with 3 dimensions
```

Inputs are specified as `name=value` pairs, in any order. Scalar inputs are
specified the typical text form, while buffer inputs (and outputs) are specified
via paths to image files. RunGen currently can read/write image files in any
format supported by halide_image_io.h; at this time, that means .png, .jpg,
.ppm, .pgm, and .tmp formats. (We plan to add .tiff and .mat (level 5) in the
future.)

```
$ ./bin/local_laplacian.rungen input=../images/rgb_small16.png levels=8 alpha=1 beta=1 output=/tmp/out.png
$ display /tmp/out.png
```

You can also specify any scalar input as `default` or `estimate`, which will use
the default value specified for the input, or the value specified by
`set_estimate` for that input. (If the relevant value isn't set for that input,
a runtime error occurs.)

```
$ ./bin/local_laplacian.rungen input=../images/rgb_small16.png levels=8 alpha=estimate beta=default output=/tmp/out.png
$ display /tmp/out.png
```

If you specify an input or output file format that doesn't match the required
type/dimensions for an argument (e.g., using an 8-bit PNG for an Input<float>,
or a grayscale image for a 3-dimensional input), RunGen will try to coerce the
inputs to something sensible; that said, it's hard to always get this right, so
warnings are **always** issued whenever an input or output is modified in any
way.

```
# This filter expects a 16-bit RGB image as input, but we're giving it an 8-bit grayscale image:
$ ./bin/local_laplacian.rungen input=../images/gray.png levels=8 alpha=1 beta=1 output=/tmp/out.png
Warning: Image for Input "input" has 2 dimensions, but this argument requires at least 3 dimensions: adding dummy dimensions of extent 1.
Warning: Image loaded for argument "input" is type uint8 but this argument expects type uint16; data loss may have occurred.
```

By default, we try to guess a suitable size for the output image(s), based
mainly on the size of the input images (if any); you can also specify explicit
output extents. (Note that output_extents are subject to constraints already
imposed by the particular Generator's logic, so arbitrary values for
--output_extents may produce runtime errors.)

```
# Constrain output extents to 100x200x3
$ ./bin/local_laplacian.rungen --output_extents=[100,200,3] input=../images/rgb_small16.png levels=8 alpha=1 beta=1 output=/tmp/out.png
```

Sometimes you don't care what the particular element values for an input are
(e.g. for benchmarking), and you just want an image of a particular size; in
that case, you can use the `zero:[]` pseudo-file; it infers the *type* from the
Generator, and inits every element to zero:

```
# Input is a 3-dimensional image with extent 123, 456, and 3
# (bluring an image of all zeroes isn't very interesting, of course)
$ ./bin/local_laplacian.rungen --output_extents=[100,200,3] input=zero:[123,456,3] levels=8 alpha=1 beta=1 output=/tmp/out.png
```

Similarly, you can create identity images where only the diagonal elements are
1-s (rest are 0-s) by invoking `identity:[]`. Diagonal elements are defined as
those whose first two coordinates are equal.

There's also a `random:SEED:[]` pseudo-file, which fills the image with uniform
noise based on a specific random-number seed:

```
# Input is a 3-dimensional image with extent 123, 456, and 3
$ ./bin/local_laplacian.rungen --output_extents=[100,200,3] input=random:42:[123,456,3] levels=8 alpha=1 beta=1 output=/tmp/out.png
```

Instead of specifying an explicit set of extents for a pseudo-input, you can use
the string `auto`, which will run a bounds query to choose a legal set of
extents for that input given the known output extents. (This is only useful when
used in conjunction with the `--output_extents` flag.)

```
$ ./bin/local_laplacian.rungen --output_extents=[100,200,3] input=zero:auto levels=8 alpha=1 beta=1 output=/tmp/out.png
```

You can also specify `estimate` for the extents, which will use the estimate
values provided, typically (but not necessarily) for auto_schedule. (If there
aren't estimates for all of the buffer's dimensions, a runtime error occurs.)

```
$ ./bin/local_laplacian.rungen --output_extents=[100,200,3] input=zero:auto levels=8 alpha=1 beta=1 output=/tmp/out.png
```

Similarly, you can use `estimate` for `--output_extents`, which will use the
estimate values for each output. (If there aren't estimates for all of the
outputs, a runtime error occurs.)

```
$ ./bin/local_laplacian.rungen --output_extents=estimate input=zero:auto levels=8 alpha=1 beta=1 output=/tmp/out.png
```

If you don't want to explicitly specify all (or any!) of the input values, you
can use the `--default_input_buffers` and `--default_input_scalars` flags, which
provide wildcards for any omitted inputs:

```
$ ./bin/local_laplacian.rungen --output_extents=[100,200,3] --default_input_buffers=random:0:auto --default_input_scalars=estimate output=/tmp/out.png
```

In this case, all input buffers will be sized according to bounds query, and
filled with a random seed; all input scalars will be initialized to their
declared default values. (If they have no declared default value, a zero of the
appropriate type will be used.)

Note: `--default_input_buffers` can produce surprising sizes! For instance, any
input that uses `BoundaryConditions::repeat_edge` to wrap itself can legally be
set to almost any size, so you may legitimately get an input with extent=1 in
all dimensions; whether this is useful to you or not depends on the code. It's
highly recommended you do testing with the `--verbose` flag (which will log the
calculated sizes) to reality-check that you are getting what you expect,
especially for benchmarking.

## Benchmarking

To run a benchmark, use the `--benchmark` flag:

```
# When you specify the --benchmark flag, outputs become optional.
$ ./bin/local_laplacian.rungen --benchmark input=zero:[1920,1080,3] levels=8 alpha=1 beta=1
Benchmark for local_laplacian produces best case of 0.0494629 sec/iter, over 3 blocks of 10 iterations.
Best output throughput is 39.9802 mpix/sec.
```

Note: this uses Halide's `halide_benchmark.h` to measure the execution time,
which runs several consecutive sample sets (default=3) of multiple iterations
(default=10) each, then chooses the best average time. You can use the
`--benchmark_samples` and `--benchmark_iterations` to override these defaults.

Note: `halide_benchmark.h` is known to be inaccurate for GPU filters; see
https://github.com/halide/Halide/issues/2278

## Measuring Memory Usage

To track memory usage, use the `--track_memory` flag, which measures the
high-water-mark of CPU memory usage.

```
# When you specify the --track_memory flag, outputs become optional.
$ ./bin/local_laplacian.rungen --track_memory input=zero:[1920,1080,3] levels=8 alpha=1 beta=1
Maximum Halide memory: 82688420 bytes for output of 1.97754 mpix.
```

Warning: `--track_memory` may degrade performance; don't combine it with
`--benchmark` or expect meaningful timing measurements when using it.

## Using RunGen in Make

To add support for RunGen to your Makefile, you need to add rules something like
this (see `apps/support/Makefile.inc` for an example):

```
HALIDE_DISTRIB ?= /path/to/halide/distrib/folder

$(BIN)/RunGenMain.o: $(HALIDE_DISTRIB)/tools/RunGenMain.cpp
  @mkdir -p $(@D)
  @$(CXX) -c $< $(CXXFLAGS) $(LIBPNG_CXX_FLAGS) $(LIBJPEG_CXX_FLAGS) -I$(BIN) -o $@

.PRECIOUS: $(BIN)/%.rungen
$(BIN)/%.rungen: $(BIN)/%.a $(BIN)/RunGenMain.o $(HALIDE_DISTRIB)/tools/RunGenStubs.cpp
  $(CXX) $(CXXFLAGS) -DHL_RUNGEN_FILTER_HEADER=\"$*.h\" $^ -o $@ $(LIBPNG_LIBS) $(LIBJPEG_LIBS) $(LDFLAGS)

RUNARGS ?=

$(BIN)/%.run: $(BIN)/%.rungen
  @$(CURDIR)/$< $(RUNARGS)
```

## Known Issues & Caveats

-   If your Generator uses `define_extern()`, you must have all link-time
    dependencies declared properly via `FILTER_DEPS`; otherwise, you'll fail to
    link.
-   The code does its best to detect when inputs or outputs need to be
    chunky/interleaved (rather than planar), but in unusual cases it might guess
    wrong; if your Generator uses buffers with unusual stride setups, RunGen
    might fail at runtime. (If this happens, please file a bug!)
-   The code for deducing good output sizes is rudimentary and needs to be
    smartened; it will sometimes make bad decisions which will prevent the
    filter from executing. (If this happens, please file a bug!)

Commit message:

More RunGen fixes
- Need to ensure to set scalar inputs before running a bounds query for buffer inputs; otherwise, the results may be wrong.
- add "estimate_then_auto" as an option for buffer inputs

README_rungen.md, after:

# Running and Benchmarking Halide Generators

## Overview

`RunGen` is a simple(ish) wrapper that allows an arbitrary Generator to be built
into a single executable that can be run directly from bash, without needing to
wrap it in your own custom main() driver. It also implements a rudimentary
benchmarking and memory-usage functionality.

If you use the standard CMake (or Bazel) rules for Generators, you get RunGen
functionality automatically. (If you use Make, you might need to add an extra
rule or two to your Makefile; all the examples in `apps/` already have these
rules.)

For every `halide_library` (or `halide_library_from_generator`) rule, there is
an implicit `name.rungen` rule that generates an executable that wraps the
Generator library:

```
# In addition to defining a static library named "local_laplacian", this rule
# also implicitly defines an executable target named "local_laplacian.rungen"
halide_library(
    local_laplacian
    SRCS local_laplacian_generator.cc
)
```

You can build and run this like any other executable:

```
$ make bin/local_laplacian.rungen && ./bin/local_laplacian.rungen
Usage: local_laplacian.rungen argument=value [argument=value... ] [flags]
...typical "usage" text...
```

To be useful, you need to pass in values for the Generator's inputs (and
locations for the output(s)) on the command line, of course. You can use the
`--describe` flag to see the names and expected types:

```
# ('make bin/local_laplacian.rungen && ' prefix omitted henceforth for clarity)
$ ./bin/local_laplacian.rungen --describe
Filter name: "local_laplacian"
  Input "input" is of type Buffer<uint16> with 3 dimensions
  Input "levels" is of type int32
  Input "alpha" is of type float32
  Input "beta" is of type float32
  Output "local_laplacian" is of type Buffer<uint16> with 3 dimensions
```

Warning: Outputs may have `$X` (where `X` is a small integer) appended to their
names in some cases (or, in the case of Generators that don't explicitly declare
outputs via `Output<>`, an autogenerated name of the form `fX`). If this
happens, don't forget to escape the `$` with a backslash as necessary. These are
both bugs we intend to fix; see https://github.com/halide/Halide/issues/2194

As a convenience, there is also an implicit target that builds-and-runs, named
simply "NAME.run":

```
# This is equivalent to "make bin/local_laplacian.rungen && ./bin/local_laplacian.rungen"
$ make bin/local_laplacian.run
Usage: local_laplacian.rungen argument=value [argument=value... ] [flags]

# To pass arguments to local_laplacian.rungen, set the RUNARGS var:
$ make bin/local_laplacian.run RUNARGS=--describe
Filter name: "local_laplacian"
  Input "input" is of type Buffer<uint16> with 3 dimensions
  Input "levels" is of type int32
  Input "alpha" is of type float32
  Input "beta" is of type float32
  Output "local_laplacian" is of type Buffer<uint16> with 3 dimensions
```

Inputs are specified as `name=value` pairs, in any order. Scalar inputs are
specified the typical text form, while buffer inputs (and outputs) are specified
via paths to image files. RunGen currently can read/write image files in any
format supported by halide_image_io.h; at this time, that means .png, .jpg,
.ppm, .pgm, and .tmp formats. (We plan to add .tiff and .mat (level 5) in the
future.)

```
$ ./bin/local_laplacian.rungen input=../images/rgb_small16.png levels=8 alpha=1 beta=1 output=/tmp/out.png
$ display /tmp/out.png
```

You can also specify any scalar input as `default` or `estimate`, which will use
the default value specified for the input, or the value specified by
`set_estimate` for that input. (If the relevant value isn't set for that input,
a runtime error occurs.)

```
$ ./bin/local_laplacian.rungen input=../images/rgb_small16.png levels=8 alpha=estimate beta=default output=/tmp/out.png
$ display /tmp/out.png
```

If you specify an input or output file format that doesn't match the required
type/dimensions for an argument (e.g., using an 8-bit PNG for an Input<float>,
or a grayscale image for a 3-dimensional input), RunGen will try to coerce the
inputs to something sensible; that said, it's hard to always get this right, so
warnings are **always** issued whenever an input or output is modified in any
way.

```
# This filter expects a 16-bit RGB image as input, but we're giving it an 8-bit grayscale image:
$ ./bin/local_laplacian.rungen input=../images/gray.png levels=8 alpha=1 beta=1 output=/tmp/out.png
Warning: Image for Input "input" has 2 dimensions, but this argument requires at least 3 dimensions: adding dummy dimensions of extent 1.
Warning: Image loaded for argument "input" is type uint8 but this argument expects type uint16; data loss may have occurred.
```

By default, we try to guess a suitable size for the output image(s), based
mainly on the size of the input images (if any); you can also specify explicit
output extents. (Note that output_extents are subject to constraints already
imposed by the particular Generator's logic, so arbitrary values for
--output_extents may produce runtime errors.)

```
# Constrain output extents to 100x200x3
$ ./bin/local_laplacian.rungen --output_extents=[100,200,3] input=../images/rgb_small16.png levels=8 alpha=1 beta=1 output=/tmp/out.png
```

Sometimes you don't care what the particular element values for an input are
(e.g. for benchmarking), and you just want an image of a particular size; in
that case, you can use the `zero:[]` pseudo-file; it infers the *type* from the
Generator, and inits every element to zero:

```
# Input is a 3-dimensional image with extent 123, 456, and 3
# (bluring an image of all zeroes isn't very interesting, of course)
$ ./bin/local_laplacian.rungen --output_extents=[100,200,3] input=zero:[123,456,3] levels=8 alpha=1 beta=1 output=/tmp/out.png
```

Similarly, you can create identity images where only the diagonal elements are
1-s (rest are 0-s) by invoking `identity:[]`. Diagonal elements are defined as
those whose first two coordinates are equal.

There's also a `random:SEED:[]` pseudo-file, which fills the image with uniform
noise based on a specific random-number seed:

```
# Input is a 3-dimensional image with extent 123, 456, and 3
$ ./bin/local_laplacian.rungen --output_extents=[100,200,3] input=random:42:[123,456,3] levels=8 alpha=1 beta=1 output=/tmp/out.png
```

Instead of specifying an explicit set of extents for a pseudo-input, you can use
the string `auto`, which will run a bounds query to choose a legal set of
extents for that input given the known output extents. (This is only useful when
used in conjunction with the `--output_extents` flag.)

```
$ ./bin/local_laplacian.rungen --output_extents=[100,200,3] input=zero:auto levels=8 alpha=1 beta=1 output=/tmp/out.png
```

You can also specify `estimate` for the extents, which will use the estimate
values provided, typically (but not necessarily) for auto_schedule. (If there
aren't estimates for all of the buffer's dimensions, a runtime error occurs.)

```
$ ./bin/local_laplacian.rungen --output_extents=[100,200,3] input=zero:auto levels=8 alpha=1 beta=1 output=/tmp/out.png
```

You can combine the two and specify `estimate_then_auto` for the extents, which
will attempt to use the estimate values; if a given input buffer has no
estimates, it will fall back to the bounds-query result for that input:

```
$ ./bin/local_laplacian.rungen --output_extents=[100,200,3] input=zero:estimate_then_auto levels=8 alpha=1 beta=1 output=/tmp/out.png
```


Similarly, you can use `estimate` for `--output_extents`, which will use the
estimate values for each output. (If there aren't estimates for all of the
outputs, a runtime error occurs.)

```
$ ./bin/local_laplacian.rungen --output_extents=estimate input=zero:auto levels=8 alpha=1 beta=1 output=/tmp/out.png
```

If you don't want to explicitly specify all (or any!) of the input values, you
can use the `--default_input_buffers` and `--default_input_scalars` flags, which
provide wildcards for any omitted inputs:

```
$ ./bin/local_laplacian.rungen --output_extents=[100,200,3] --default_input_buffers=random:0:auto --default_input_scalars=estimate output=/tmp/out.png
```

In this case, all input buffers will be sized according to bounds query, and
filled with a random seed; all input scalars will be initialized to their
declared default values. (If they have no declared default value, a zero of the
appropriate type will be used.)

Note: `--default_input_buffers` can produce surprising sizes! For instance, any
input that uses `BoundaryConditions::repeat_edge` to wrap itself can legally be
set to almost any size, so you may legitimately get an input with extent=1 in
all dimensions; whether this is useful to you or not depends on the code. It's
highly recommended you do testing with the `--verbose` flag (which will log the
calculated sizes) to reality-check that you are getting what you expect,
especially for benchmarking.

## Benchmarking

To run a benchmark, use the `--benchmark` flag:

```
# When you specify the --benchmark flag, outputs become optional.
$ ./bin/local_laplacian.rungen --benchmark input=zero:[1920,1080,3] levels=8 alpha=1 beta=1
Benchmark for local_laplacian produces best case of 0.0494629 sec/iter, over 3 blocks of 10 iterations.
Best output throughput is 39.9802 mpix/sec.
```

Note: this uses Halide's `halide_benchmark.h` to measure the execution time,
which runs several consecutive sample sets (default=3) of multiple iterations
(default=10) each, then chooses the best average time. You can use the
`--benchmark_samples` and `--benchmark_iterations` to override these defaults.

Note: `halide_benchmark.h` is known to be inaccurate for GPU filters; see
https://github.com/halide/Halide/issues/2278

## Measuring Memory Usage

To track memory usage, use the `--track_memory` flag, which measures the
high-water-mark of CPU memory usage.

```
# When you specify the --track_memory flag, outputs become optional.
$ ./bin/local_laplacian.rungen --track_memory input=zero:[1920,1080,3] levels=8 alpha=1 beta=1
Maximum Halide memory: 82688420 bytes for output of 1.97754 mpix.
```

Warning: `--track_memory` may degrade performance; don't combine it with
`--benchmark` or expect meaningful timing measurements when using it.

## Using RunGen in Make

To add support for RunGen to your Makefile, you need to add rules something like
this (see `apps/support/Makefile.inc` for an example):

```
HALIDE_DISTRIB ?= /path/to/halide/distrib/folder

$(BIN)/RunGenMain.o: $(HALIDE_DISTRIB)/tools/RunGenMain.cpp
  @mkdir -p $(@D)
  @$(CXX) -c $< $(CXXFLAGS) $(LIBPNG_CXX_FLAGS) $(LIBJPEG_CXX_FLAGS) -I$(BIN) -o $@

.PRECIOUS: $(BIN)/%.rungen
$(BIN)/%.rungen: $(BIN)/%.a $(BIN)/RunGenMain.o $(HALIDE_DISTRIB)/tools/RunGenStubs.cpp
  $(CXX) $(CXXFLAGS) -DHL_RUNGEN_FILTER_HEADER=\"$*.h\" $^ -o $@ $(LIBPNG_LIBS) $(LIBJPEG_LIBS) $(LDFLAGS)

RUNARGS ?=

$(BIN)/%.run: $(BIN)/%.rungen
  @$(CURDIR)/$< $(RUNARGS)
```

## Known Issues & Caveats

-   If your Generator uses `define_extern()`, you must have all link-time
    dependencies declared properly via `FILTER_DEPS`; otherwise, you'll fail to
    link.
-   The code does its best to detect when inputs or outputs need to be
    chunky/interleaved (rather than planar), but in unusual cases it might guess
    wrong; if your Generator uses buffers with unusual stride setups, RunGen
    might fail at runtime. (If this happens, please file a bug!)
-   The code for deducing good output sizes is rudimentary and needs to be
    smartened; it will sometimes make bad decisions which will prevent the
    filter from executing. (If this happens, please file a bug!)
